hello and welcome to the latest episode
of the equation stripped where I take
some of the most important equations in
maths and then ship them back layer by
layer so that anyone can understand this
time we're looking at logarithms or logs
as they are known for short and these
used to be incredibly useful for
computations but with the modern
dimension of computers we don't really
use them specifically for that anymore
but they still have a really important
role to play in modern mathematics and
science in particular they're used for
helping us to understand concepts and
they are very important in fields such
as thermodynamics and information theory
for our first layer I'm going to discuss
why logarithms are so useful and the
main reason for this is that they tell
us how to multiply numbers by instead
doing addition so for example if you
want to multiply two ten digit numbers
nowadays of course you stick it in a
calculator you use a computer but back
in the sixteen hundreds when logarithms
were first invented of course you didn't
have computers so you couldn't do that
and to multiply together two ten digit
numbers there were around 200 steps so
it's going to take a while
whereas if you could somehow convert the
multiplication of two ten digit numbers
into the addition of two ten digit
numbers you only have to do around 20
steps so that is a decrease by tenfold
the invention of logarithms meant you
could do calculations much much faster
and so it allows scientists to make
progress with calculations of the orbits
of the planets of trajectories of comets
and even more recently understanding
radioactive decay for the number two of
the logarithm equation we're going to
look at where logarithms came from and
in order to do that we need to think
about powers of numbers so if we take
the two simple examples of 10 squared
and 10 cubed and this just
to algebra so instead of having a number
such as 10 squared or 10 cubed we could
have a squared for example which is just
n times peg or we could have a cubed
which is just a times a times a now what
happens if we do 10 squared at times 10
cubed and writing this in shorthand in
the same way that we have two terms is
10 squared 3 tens is 10 cubed here we
have five lots of 10 and so this is just
10 to the 5 and the same thing would be
true if we did a squared times a cubed
and the reason I'd sort of spelt it out
for you like this is because when you
multiply two powers what you actually do
is you just add the powers together and
taking what we've just learned and
writing the law in the most general
algebraic form possible what we
basically be doing is using the idea
that X to the power of Y times X to the
power Z is just equal to X to the Y plus
Z that's all there is to it and you can
see here that we're beginning to turn a
multiplication problem of two numbers
into an addition problem so let's take a
simple example suppose we want to work
out the multiplication of two numbers so
let's make these decimal numbers to make
it a bit trickier pretty simple to do on
a calculator or a computer but if they
don't exist which we assuming they don't
here that's quite a difficult song to
work out and what we want to do is to be
able to convert this multiplication into
an addition and that is where logarithms
are going to help us and our starting
point is going to be this power law both
of our two numbers are written in terms
of X so this is our first number this is
our second
number both of them are written in terms
of X to the power of something so here X
we have a choice of what that can be
so I'm gonna say let X be 10 and what we
want to do is write 1.45 as a power of
10 and write 3.85 as a power of 10 and
so using this now we know what the
answer is it's just 10 to the power of
the sum of the two powers which is
naught point seven four six oh you can
just add the two powers together and
again we do some arithmetic that tells
us that the answer is five point five
seven two now first glance this may seem
more difficult than just doing the
original multiplication and you're
probably right it's it's adding extra
steps and we have to work that powers of
ten decimal powers of 10 it's quite
tricky but the really important thing
here is if somebody somewhere has sat
down and worked out every single
possible power of 10 and written them
all in a giant table and put it into a
book called a logarithm table then this
is actually really easy so step one you
go right one point four five look
through my book find what power of 10
equals one point four five it's 10 to
the north point one six one great 3.85
find that in our book and see oh look
it's ten to the north point five eight
five all we do now is just add the two
powers together this is the sort of
unknown in the problem but it's much
simpler to add these two numbers nor
point one six one plus not point five
eight five much easier than trying to
fault apply the original two and so we
get the answer is 10 to the nor point
seven four six and again we're going to
look back at our buck because someone's
already worked out well 10 to the nine
point seven four six is they've done
that for us and then we get our answer
five point five seven two so this is
great as long as somebody who's worked
out
logarithm tables and that is what
mathematicians in the sixteen and
seventeen hundred's did they would sit
there work out these logarithm tables
for all of the different possible
choices of base stripping back to our
third layer now we're going to look at
the equation itself what this is telling
us is that the logarithm of a b is equal
to the logarithm of a plus the logarithm
of b and it's one of the main rules of
looks the X term which appears next to
all of the logs that's telling you in
what base you're operating with your
logarithm and so the X here in this
equation is the same as the ten over
here in our equation for the example
that we just went through and in terms
of understanding what each of these
three terms actually mean perhaps the
easiest way to get a grasp on them is to
relate them to our example over here
beginning on the right-hand side of our
equation with the term in blue this is
telling us that the logarithm base X of
a is equal to naught point one six one
so a here would be our one point four
five this is the number that we want to
convert into base 10 and X here is 10
and then the logarithm of a the
logarithm of one point four five in base
10 is the power 10 needs to be raised to
to get one point four five similarly for
the term in green this is the logarithm
base X of the number B B here is three
point eight five and so the logarithm
base X when X is 10 of B is the power
that 10 has to be raised to to get the
answer three point eight five and that
would be not point five eight five and
finally the term on the left hand side
is telling us that the logarithm base X
of a times B is just equal to the sum of
these two and that's exactly what we've
done over here so the term in red is
just the power that ten needs to be
raised to to get the product of
and B which is noir point seven four six
and as we counter ladies in our example
it's just the sum of the other two terms
now that we've stripped back to our
fourth and final plane we can start to
think about the other properties of
locks so here we have the addition
property of logs which says that log of
a B is equal to log a plus log B and
there are other properties that maybe
you've been taught at school and
university and now we can start to think
about don't so the key here is that as
you've seen in our derivation so far
we've based everything around this rule
in terms of powers its power law and so
when thinking about other properties of
logs as long as we return back and refer
to this log we can start to make sense
of negative powers and of zero powers
and maybe even fractional powers now
that we've defined negative and
fractional powers we can start to get
all the properties about logarithms so
here we know that log of a times B is
log n plus log B the second property of
logs is the log of a divided by B is log
of a minus log of B and the reason
you're subtracting here is because
you're dividing numbers and dividing by
a number is a negative power as we've
seen over him another property of logs
which is perhaps the most useful is this
one which says that the log of a to the
power C is the same as see lots of log
of N and this is incredibly useful when
working out square roots cube roots and
higher-order roots of numbers so if you
want to work out the square root of x if
you take the logarithm of that that is
equal to the log of x to the heart and
using the result over on the left of the
board we know that that is just 1/2 of
log X and so we could just look up in a
table what the logarithm of a particular
number is in say base 10 and then we
just take 1/2 of that number and we have
our square root it's so much
- number than it is to work out a square
root and it's the same with cube roots
where this would be a third or fourth
roots where this would be a quarter and
this pattern continues and it just meant
that working up very involved
calculations of all the groups of
numbers suddenly became really simple
thank you everybody for watching I hope
that you now have a better understanding
of logarithms and some of their most
simple properties and you also know
where this equation came from remember
if you like what I'm doing please do
subscribe that way you'll get a
notification when I post a new video
also check out my website Tom box maths
calm there's all kinds of maps based fun
for you to check out there and please do
follow me on social media I'm on
Facebook Twitter Instagram or at Tom
rocks maths and I will see you soon with
another episode of equation script